---
layout: post
title: MTA Turnstile Data and WomenTechWomenYes
img: MTA/MTA-A-Train.jpg
---
Our first project at Metis, Project Benson, concerned an analysis to increase participation and support for the annual gala for a new, inclusive tech-oriented organization WomenTechWomenYes (WTWY), to be held at the beginning of the summer. WTWY intends to deploy street teams in the vicinity of subway stations in order to collect email addresses and essentially draw attention to its event. THe objective our group was tasked with was the development of recommendations to optimize street team placement to maximize sign-ups and spread awareness for WTWY and its annual gala.

## The Data

We used freely available [MTA Turnstile Data](http://web.mta.info//developers//turnstile.html) containing comma-separated value (CSV) formatted records of weekly individual turnstile entries and exits. Note that the dates associated with each available data file reflects data collected for the week ending with the indicated date. Each individual record provides a specific turnstile location's entries and exits over a specified four-hour period. In order to understand the potential passenger flow patterns that we might observe ahead of the WTWY gala, our selected dataset covered several weeks spanning April-June 2017.

## Data Wrangling

Several issues arose in initial examination of the dataset:

* The values of entries and exits provided for each record are *cumulative* and not raw values, so our initial efforts were significantly dedicated to deriving the actual counts
* Before or after the above step, many values for passenger entries and exits may have been negative or unrealistically high, representing (potentially) counter resets or other mechanical errors. Negative values were excluded and we selected a threshold (say, anything more than 1 entry or exit per second) for excluding unrealistically high values
* Some duplicate values for specific combinations of turnstile location and time were present
* Some variable names (column headers) were poorly formatted and needing fixing
* Disparities in the numbers of entries and exits for any given combination of turnstile location and time period
* Irregular collection of data across turnstile locations

## Exploratory Analysis

We ultimately decided to focus on the entries only, determining that this data tracked the entries adequately and that the exits may not reflect the true volume, as many potential riders do not exit through a turnstile. After making this decision and accounting for the above issues described, we first focused on volume (using the total number of entries) over our selected time period -- observing that the six most utilized stations primarily occupied the area between 34th and 42nd Streets and Park and 8th Avenues.

From there, we examined volume according to time of day and differentiating between weekends and weekdays, over the top 5 stations. As one might have expected, weekday volumes are higher across time of day compared to those on weekends -- with the highest volumes associated with the morning and evening rush hours.

## Recommendations

From our analysis, we selected as our area of street team deployment, an area in Midtown South between Park Avenue <–> 8th Avenue & 34th Street <–> 42nd Street.

In this area, we recommended deploying multiple street teams:

* Team A, to collect emails and signatures, and generally attempt to deeply engage people outside the top stations
* Team B, to hand out information on WTWY (and free USB sticks) inside the stations to passers by

The objective of this part of our recommendations is to cast as wide a net as possible for potential donors and attendees with teams providing both passive and active engagement with commuters.

We also recommended deployment at Citi Bike stations near stations to engage commuters traveling to areas not near a subway station and potentially in a more meaningful fashion (given less congestion and the open setting).

Our overall strategy made no assumptions regarding the demographics of potential donors/attendees, focusing on volume and maximizing reach.

## Limitations and Next Steps

There were several limitations to our analysis:

* Focusing on one limited region of Manhattan, resulting in missing out on engagement in other parts of the city
* The highly commercial nature of the region, where commuters may not be inclined to engage with street teams during their time of deployment -- it may be that a more residential setting could result in more positive engagement
* Assuming that weekdays would be preferrable also limits potential reach and opportunities to engage with people in a more relaxed setting

As previously mentioned, we focused primarily on volume and relied on the MTA data itself. Additional sources of data (as used by many other groups) could have been analyzed to understand the demographics of different regions of the cities which may have a special interest in WTWY. On this same note, an exploration into data on charitable giving may also have been informative of the populations most likely to engage with street teams and show interest in WTWY and its event.

More details can be found in our [full presentation](../assets/img/MTA/presentation-mta-tech_jblinder_dlee.pdf)
